FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS (FAQ) ON SPECIAL INTENSIVE REVISION (SIR) 2026 
 
1 What is Special Intensive 
Revision (SIR)? 
 
The Election Commission of India, under Article 324  of 
Constitution of India, Section 21 of the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950 along with other applicable provisions of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950, is empowered for 
preparation and revision of Electoral Rolls.  
To maintain the integrity of the electoral roll,  the 
Commission orders revision of electoral roll before every 
election or as per requirement.  
This year the Commission has announced Special Intensive 
Revision (SIR). 
2 What is the objective of SIR Since many changes have occurred in the existing 
electoral roll due to frequent migration which has 
resulted in electors getting registered in more than one 
place, non removal of dead voters the Election 
Commission announced the Special Intensive Revision 
with the objective that No eligible citizen is left out 
and no ineligible person is included  in the Electoral 
Roll. 
 
3 What is the duration of SIR 
process in Delhi? 
 
The SIR in Delhi starts from 30.06.2026 and will end -up with 
publication of Final electoral roll on 04.11.2026. 
4 What are the phases of SIR? 
 
S. 
No 
Activity Period 
1. House to House visit 
by BLOs 
30.06.2026 to  
17.08.2026 
2. Publication of draft 
electoral roll 
31.08.2026 
3. Period of filing claims 
&objections 
31.08.2026 to  
30.09.2026 
4. Notice Phase and 
disposal of claims 
and objections  
31.08.2026 to 
29.10.2026 
5. Final Publication of 
Electoral Roll 
04.11.2026 
5 
(a) 
What are the procedures 
adopted for distribution / 
collection of Enumeration 
Form? 
 
 The Booth level Officers (BLOs) will visit each house 
hold and distribute the pre -printed Enumeration forms 
in duplicate to the existing electors and guide them in 
filling up the form.  
 In case of your absence, the form will be handed  over 
to any adult member of your family or will be slipped 
in the house if house found locked.  
 The electors will have to file the relevant details in the 
Enumeration forms and the filled in Enumeration form 
will be collected by the Booth Level Officers du ring 
the subsequent vis it, for that t he Booth Level Officer 
will make atlea st 3 visits for collection of Enumeration 
Form. 
 The Booth level officer will collect the forms and keep 
one copy of the Enumeration form with him/her and 
give an acknowledgement of receipt of form on the 
other copy of Enumeration Form, which is to be 
retained by the elector.  
 
  
5 
(b) 
Can Enumeration Form be 
filled through online?  
The Elector can also fill the Enumeration Form online and 
submit for which provision is provided in the ECI website  
https://voters.eci.gov.in .  
 
 
 
What should I do if I did not 
receive my Enumeration Form 
(EF)? 
 
The Enumeration Form will be delivered by the BLO at the 
address registered in the Electoral Roll.  
 
An elector can contact the Booth Level Officer either over 
phone using the contact number of Booth Level Officer 
available on  https://www.ceo.delhi.gov.in . 
Or  
Through the Book a Call with BLO option which is available 
in the website  https://voters.eci.gov.in or ECINet Mobile App.  
 
Details of BLO will also  be printed at the top of Enumeration 
Form. 
7 How do I check whether my 
name exists in the Electoral 
Roll of Last SIR held in Delhi  
? 
 
Last SIR in Delhi was held in Year 2002.  
 
For the convenience of General public, voter list of last 
Special Intensive Revision held in year 2002 in Delhi has 
been uploaded on the website of CEO, Delhi at the link  
https://ceodelhinet.nic.in/ceodelhiweb/Electoralroll_2002.aspx  
 
Details can also be searched  b y using the “search by 
details” or“ search by “EPIC Number” or “ Polling Station” 
options available in the search facility of the portal.  
By EPIC No:  
https://ceodelhinet.nic.in/Dashboard/ElectorSearch/ElectorSearch_2002  
By Elector Details:  
https://ceodelhinet.nic.in/Dashboard/ElectorSearch/ElectorSearchByName_2002  
 
By Polling Station:  
https://ceodelhinet.nic.in/ceodelhiweb/ElectorSearchByPollingStation_20
02.aspx  
8 How do I search my name if  
I have settled in Delhi after 
2002? 
In case any elector has come from other State and settled in 
Delhi after 2002, his/her name will not appear in 2002 voter list of 
Delhi. In such case, electors can search their details on the ECI’s 
portal at following link:  
https://voters.eci.gov.in/searchInSIR/S2UA4DPDF-JK4QWODSE 
Steps: 
Upon opening of Portal, Select your State, District, Assembly 
Constituency, Electors Full Name in last SIR, Elector Relative Full 
Name, Enter Captcha and click on Search Button.  
9 What details of last SIR will be 
required to be filled in 
Enumeration Form? 
Relative name, State Name, AC Name, AC Number, P olling 
Station No, Part Sr No. as appearing in the voter list of 
2002/2003/2005 (year of last SIR held in that particular State, as 
the case may be) will be required for filling in the Enumeration 
Form.  
10 What should be done if name 
of an Elector is not found in the 
Electoral Roll of last SIR. 
 
In such cases, an elector  can link himself/herself with his/her or 
relative’s entries in electoral rolls of the relevant last Special 
Intensive Revision of the respective States/UTs as the case may 
be. 
  
11 What if name of elector (self) 
or any relatives (father/ 
mother/grand father / grand 
mother) (Paternal & Maternal 
Both) could not be linked with 
electoral roll of   last SIR 
In such cases, Electors have to  fill his/her particulars like date of 
birth, Aadhaar No. (optional), Mobile No, Father’s/Guardian’s 
Name, Father’s/Guardian’s EPIC No. Mother’s details/Spouse 
details &  return the Enumeration Form without filling last SIR 
details. He/she has to provide any of the 12 documents prescribed 
by the ECI upon recei pt of notice from ERO during  Notice phase, 
as the case may be.  
12 What details are required to 
be filled in Enumeration Form 
in case of daughter in law 
whose name was not present 
in the electoral roll of last 
SIR. 
The last SIR details of the Parents /grand-parents (ममममम) (Both 
Paternal & Maternal) of such applicants will have to be provided 
in Enumeration Form and not the details of Father-in-law/Mother-
in-law. 
13 What documents have to be 
provided alongwith 
Enumeration Form 
During Enumeration phase,  no document is required to be 
provided by the elector.  
 
14 Where can I find help if I 
face issues with the 
Enumeration Form filling 
or to search the electors 
details?  
 
The Booth level Officers (BLOs) visit ing each house will guide in 
filling up the form and to search the elector details.  
The voters can also contact Toll Free Voter Helpline Number – 
1950 or use Book a Call with BLO facility available in the website 
https://voters.eci.gov.in  or through ECINet Mobile app.  
 
Name  & No. of BLO will also  be prin ted at the top of 
Enumeration Form. 
Helpdesks have also been setup both at District & AC level. 
15 Will I receive an 
acknowledgement after 
submission of Enumeration 
Form?  
Yes, t he Booth level officer will collect the forms and keep 
one copy of the Enumeration form with him/her and give an 
acknowledgement of receipt of form on the other copy of 
Enumeration Form, which is to be retained by the elector.  
16 Is it mandatory to provide 
Aadhaar number for 
submission of Enumeration 
Form? 
No, providing Aadh aar number in the Enumeration Form is 
optional.  
17 What is the procedure to fill 
Online Enumeration Form? 
 
The Election Commission of India (ECI) has made a 
provision on its official website  https://voters.eci.gov.in  for 
the convenience of electors to fill up the Enumeration Form 
online. 
Electors can log in to the portal using their registered mobile 
number or EPIC number, and authenticate themselves by 
entering the OTP received on their regis tered mobile 
number. After login, they can select the option available 
under the caption “Fill Enumeration Form.”  
This facility is available to all electors whose name in the 
electoral roll matches with the name in their Aadhaar card.  
Upon successful login , the elector is required to fill in the 
necessary details displayed on the webpage. After 
submitting the correct details, the system will redirect the 
elector to the e -sign page. An OTP will then be sent to the 
registered mobile number for authentication,  and upon 
entering the OTP, the form will be successfully uploaded.  
All electors who have registered their mobile numbers and 
whose names match in both Electoral Roll and Aadhaar 
records are requested to make use of this convenient online 
facility. 
  
18 If an elector or his/her 
entire family is out of 
station, then how the form 
can be submitted?  
 
If an elector or their entire family is out of station during the 
House- to-House Enumeration Phase, they may utilize the 
option of submitting online Enumeration  Form which can be 
accessed through the Election Commission of India’s official 
portal at https://voters.eci.gov.in   
This Facility enables electors to complete the process even 
when they are not physically present at their residence.  
19 What happens if the 
Enumeration Forms are not   
returned?  
 
Names of only those electors will be included in the Draft 
Electoral Roll whos e filled in Enumeration Forms are 
received back by the BLO.  
For electors whose Enumeration Forms are not returned, 
the Booth Level Officer will identify the cause such as 
Absent/Death/Shifted/ Duplicate based on inquiry from 
nearby electors.  
20 What if I could not deposit 
Enumeration Form.  
If Enumeration Form is not deposited to the BLO, your 
name will not reflect in the Draft Roll to be published on 
31.08.2026.  
 
21 
My name does not appear in 
draft roll as I could not 
deposit enumeration Form 
in time. But I still need my 
name in the Final Roll.  
If you are eligible and want to enroll yourself as an elector 
after publish of draft roll, you may file Form 6 during the 
period of claims and objection alongwith Declaration Form 
and other supporting documents prescribed by the ECI.   
22 What if my name appears in 
two places?  
 
As per section 17 & 18 of Representation of People Act, 
1950, No person shall be entitled to be registered in the 
electoral roll for more than one constituency or more 
than once in a constituency.  
If registered at more than one place, submit the Enumeration 
Form in the constituency  only, where you are currently 
residing. Other entry will get deleted from the fresh Draft 
Electoral Roll.  
23 What are the documents 
to be submitted upon 
getting the notice? 
 
The ECI has suggested the below list of necessary 
supportive documents which may be provided by Electors.  
1. Any Identity card/Pension Payment Order issued to 
a regular employee/pensioner of any Central Govt./State 
Govt./PSU.  
2. Any Identity Card/Certif icate/Document issued in 
India by the Government/ local authorities/Banks/Post 
Office/LIC/PSUs prior to 01.07.1987.  
3. Birth Certificate issued by the competent authority.  
4. Passport  
5. Matriculation/Educational  certificate  issued by 
recognized  Boards/ Universitie s 
6. Permanent Residence certificate issued by the 
competent State authority  
7. Forest Right Certificate  
8. OBC/SC/ST or any caste certificate issued by the 
Competent Authority  
9. National Register of Citizens (wherever it exists)  
10. Family Register, prepared by State/Local authorities.  
11. Any land/house allotment certificate by the Government  
12. For Aadhaar, the Commission’s directions issued vide 
letter No.23/2025 -ERS/Vol.II dated 09.09.2025 shall 
apply. 
24 If a voter in the family is 
employed abroad or 
working in other city/State 
how the person’s 
Enumeration Form can be 
filled up? 
If a voter in the family is employed abroad or working in 
other city /State, an adult member of the family can fill up the 
details of that non -available elector in the Enumeration 
Form, they can sign on behalf of the elector and submit it to 
the Booth Level Officer.  
 
  
25 What should a voter do 
after submitting the form?  
After publication of the Draft Electoral Roll, voters must 
check whether their name has been correctly included in the 
draft electoral roll.  
Draft Publication will be done on 31 .08.2026.  
26 How will I know my 
Enumeration form was 
accepted?  
Your name will be reflected in the draft roll.  
 
27 How can a voter check if 
their name is included in 
the Draft Roll?  
(a) By checking the Draft Electoral Roll available with the 
BLO/ or at Voter Center.  
(b) Through the ECINET mobile app  
(c) Through voters.eci.gov.in  
Draft Roll will also be made available on the CEO Delhi 
website. 
28 What to do in case my name 
is not there in the draft list?  
You may file Form 6 during the period of claims and 
objection alongwith Declaration Form and other supporting 
documents prescribed by the ECI.  
29 Can a new elector who 
has completed 18 years, 
apply for inclusion of 
his/her name in the 
electoral roll now?  
 
The new elector who has completed 18 years or will be 
completing 18 years on  or before  01.10.2026 can apply in 
Form-6 for inclusion of his/her name in the electoral roll 
along with declaration form for enrolment either through 
online or offline at voter centre.  
The blank forms will also be available with the BLO. These 
forms will be processed during the Claims and Objections 
period.   
These changes will be reflected in the final roll.  
30 How do I update my 
address if I have moved to a 
new location?  
 
BLO will not  be able to distribute your Enumeration  Form at 
your address registered in Electoral Roll  as you are not 
residing there . Hence, your name will not appear in the 
Draft Electoral Roll to be published on  31.08.2026 for the 
reason “Permanently Shifted” and in the absence of 
submission of Enumeration Form . 
You may file Form 6 during the period of claims and 
objection alongwith Declaration Form and other supporting 
documents prescribed by the ECI for inclusion of your 
name at the shi fted place /new location . 
31 When will the final electoral 
rolls be published?  
Electoral Roll will be published on 04th Nov 2026 and 
displayed a t the Voter Center in physical form and will also 
be made available on the official website of CEO Delhi.  
32 What if my name is  still  not 
reflected in the Final Roll  
 
The applicant can  file an appeal before the District Election 
Officer/District Magistrate of concerned  District within 15 
days.  
 
*************************** 