  
 
Page 1 of 24 
 
Note explaining process of annual revision/updation of Electoral Rolls 
along with 
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) 
 
widest possible transparency and disclosure ; house to house survey; physical field 
verification; display and sharing of list of claims and objections; supervision  and 
random checking; sharing of draft and final electoral roll with political  parties; 
rigorous SoP for deletion of names  - 
 
The creation, maintenance and purification of ER- a core constitutional responsibility of the 
ECI – has a well-defined and meticulously followed legacy over decades.  The credibility of the process 
is organically linked to data/facts over several revisions and continuous updation of previous data 
sets. The process is ensconced in a watertight statutory scheme which is rule based.  
The Commission firmly believes that an inclusive, healthy, pure & transparently prepared 
electoral roll is the foundation of free, fair and credible electi on. Therefore, the Commission makes 
all out efforts to make the electoral roll pure, healthy and inclusive within the given framework of 
Article 324 of the Constitution of India , provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 , 
Registration of the Electors Rules, 1960 and the extant instructions issued by the Commission from 
time to time.  
All political parties are fully aware of the SoPs for Special Summery Revision (SSR) and the 
special measures taken during SSR. Additions and deletions take place after due enquiry, in full public 
view and with participation of political parties at every stage of the process. Being an annual revision 
exercise, only changes during the period of revision get updated that too after sharing relevant 
details with political parties and the public at large. 
 
The process of revision of electoral rolls:  
 
The electoral roll is prepared in accordance with the well -defined protocol & 
procedure and following the principle of natural justice by providing reasonable 
opportunity to the electors and all stakeholders, political parties in particular. The 
electoral roll is in the state of continuous updation throughout the year except during 
election in a constituency for a period from the last date of filing nomination to 
completion of election process. The Commission ensures utmost transparency at eac h 
stage of revision of roll so that people can beforehand check entries in electoral roll and 
can file any claim or objection, to avoid any post facto objection or grievances. In case of 
deletion, notice is issued and an opportunity given to electors for f iling an objection and 
hearing is given. 
 
All GE to LAs are specifically preceded by Special Summary Revision (SSR) precisely 
to allow all stakeholders to be on notice about the upcoming general election . This is an 
additional measure over and above annual  revision of electoral rolls which in any case 
takes place. All the Political Parties have been familiar with SSR guidelines, formats and 
processes. ECI has also provided for appointment of Booth Level Agents (BLA) by 
recognized political parties as an equal opportunity & extra facilitation to them ensuring 
utmost transparency in the process.  
 
Every entry in ER database, either by way of addition/ deletion/ transportation, is 
credible, as it is based on voluntariness of the citizen to enroll and an open disclosure and 
  
 
Page 2 of 24 
 
public hearing to objections, if any and, thereafter the entries are available for perpetual 
scrutiny and legal challenge.   
For the sake of clarity, the cycle of the electoral roll revision process for a calendar 
year is illustrated in the diagram below.   
 
 
 
In context of the preparation and updation of electoral rolls, some questions which may be 
frequently asked (FAQs) and replies thereto are given below to remove any doubts arising in 
the minds of political parties, electors and the general public. 
 
 
 

  
 
Page 3 of 24 
 
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) 
 
Special Summary Revision (SSR) 
Q1. What is ‘Special Summery Revision ’? 
Ans. As per Rule 25(1) of RER 196 0, there are following types of revision - 
 Intensive revision. 
 Summery revision. 
 Partly intensive and partly summery.  
Now a days, the Commission orders Summery revision with certain special 
characteristics, with intensive pre -revision activities like house -to-house 
verification, rationalization of polling stations, special campaign dates etc. , hence it 
is called Special Summery Revision.  
Q2. What are the stages of Special Summery Revision of ER?   
Ans. The SSR of electoral rolls involves two main stages:  
(i) Pre-revision activities mainly include training of official, House -to-House 
verification b y the Booth Level Officers (BLO)  for identification of un -enrolled 
eligible electors, identification of discrepancies, removal of multiple/shifted/dead 
electors, standardization of addresses , rationalization and modification  of polling 
stations, updation of control tables, preparation of website, integration of 
supplements and preparation of draft roll.  
(ii) Revision activities: The actual revision starts with the publication of Draft electoral 
roll.  With the publication of draft electoral roll, the ERO invites claims and objections 
from all eligible citizens and after processing of such applications, with due 
procedure, inclusion/deletions/correction of entries is carried out by ERO. 
Discrepancies already identified by BLOs durin g the pre -revision activities are also 
taken-up for removal during this period. All the inclusions, deletions and correction 
carried out during this period are updated in the electoral roll database and Electoral 
Roll is finally published on the date as pe r approved schedule.   
 
Transparency & involvement of political parties in the process 
Q3.  What transparency measures are taken during the revision process?  
Ans. The Election Commission ensures transparency during the revision of electoral rolls 
by providing various means for public access to the rolls and claims. Key 
transparency measures include:  
 Free copies of the draft and final electoral rolls, along with weekly lists of claims and 
objections, are provided to recognized political parties  to make them aware about 
the process to avoid any post facto objection or grievances . 
 The draft and final rolls are hosted on the CEO/DEO websites.  
  
 
Page 4 of 24 
 
 The rolls are displayed at designated polling stations location and ERO offices notice 
board. 
 During continuous updation period, monthly pooling of lists of additions, deletions, 
and modifications are published on the website  of CEO  for the information of 
general public. 
 ECI has provided the provision of the appointment of Booth Level Agents (BLA) by 
the recognized pol itical parties as an extra facilitation to them ensuring utmost 
transparency in the process. BLAs do not interfere with the registration process and 
in the functioning of BLOs but only to identify and flag any discrepancy or impurity 
in the electoral roll of the polling station/part concerned.  
Q4. How the participation of political parties and candidates is ensured in the 
preparation of electoral rolls?  
Ans. The Election Commission has directed that election authorities shall involve 
representative of poli tical parties at each stage of preparation of electoral roll and 
ensures utmost transparency during the whole process. Key transparency measures 
include: 
 Periodic meetings with the representatives of recognized political parties are held 
at the level of CEO/DEO/ERO during SSR to apprise them about the process  
 Copies of the draft and final electoral rolls are provided free of cost to recognized 
political parties. 
 Weekly lists of all claims and objections are provided to recognized political parties 
during summery revision period. 
 The draft and final rolls are hosted on the CEO/DEO websites.  
 The rolls are displayed at designated polling station locations and EROs’ offices 
notice board. 
 Copy of ER is also made available to the general public on payment of nominal fee 
 During continuous updation, monthly updates on additions, deletions, and 
modifications are published on the website.  
 Political parties are provided with an extra facilitation to appoint their Booth Level 
Agents (BLAs) to interact with BLOs to e nsure transparency without interfering 
with the registration process and flag any discrepancy or impurity in the electoral 
roll of the polling station/part concerned.  
 During elections, soon after the last date of nomination, candidates of recognized 
political parties are provided free of cost with the copy of Electoral Roll to be used 
for the conduct of election. 
Q.5. Whether political parties are involved in case of in clusion of name of electors 
in electoral roll? 
Ans. Yes. Political parties, being the major stakeholder, are involved at each stage of 
revision of roll. During SSR, lists of all such applications are made available by ERO 
to all political parties on weekly basis. For this purpose, the ERO calls a meeting of all 
  
 
Page 5 of 24 
 
political parties on regular interval and personally handover such lists to them and 
obtain acknowledgment. ERO also exhibits such lists on the notice board in his office. 
These lists are also put up on the website of CEO with adequate publicity. This is also 
informed to the political parties by holding regular periodic meetings with them at 
the level of CEO, DEO & ERO and written communications to them.  
Decision on applications is taken only after at least seven clear days’ period of 
publishing the lists and furnishing it to the political parties.  
During continuous updation period, monthly updates on additions, deletions, and 
modifications are published on the website  of CEO. 
Q6. Whether political parties are informed regarding any deletion in electoral roll? 
 Ans. Yes. Political parties are always kept informed with regards to all the proposed 
deletions. During SSR, lists of all such applications are made available by ERO to all 
political parties on w eekly basis. For this purpose, the ERO calls a meeting of all 
political parties on regular interval and personally handover such lists to them and 
obtain acknowledgment. ERO also exhibits such lists on the notice board in his /her 
office. These lists are also put up on the website of CEO with adequate publicity.  
Decision on claims and objections is taken by ERO only after all of the following 
conditions are complied with – 
i. At least seven clear days’ period has passed after list of claims and objections has 
been published on all of the following – 
 Website of CEO, as clickable lists for each polling station  
 Notice board of ERO (In Forms 9, 10, 11, 11A and 11B of RERs 1960)  
 Notice board of polling station (In Forms 9, 10, 11, 11A and 11B of RERs 1960)  
 A personal notice has been served on the person whose name is proposed to be 
deleted in cases other than death cases.  
ii. At least period of seven clear days has passed after furnishing the list of claims and 
objections to political parties.  
During continuous u pdation period, monthly updates on additions, deletions, and 
modifications are published on the website  
Q7. Are the political parties involved in the process of revision of roll at each 
polling station level in constituency?   
Ans.  Yes. Political parties are involved at polling station level in each constituency in the 
process of revision of electoral roll.  
 Political parties are encouraged to appoint their Booth Level Agents (BLAs) to 
interact with BLOs to ensure transparency and to  flag any discrepancy or impurity 
in the electoral roll of the polling station/part concerned.  
 Part-wise list of claims & objections is published and provided to the political 
parties.  
 At the time of draft and final publication of roll, part -wise roll is  provided free of 
cost to all recognized political parties.  
  
 
Page 6 of 24 
 
 Representative of political parties at polling station level are informed and involved 
about all the crucial dates like special campaign dates etc.  
Safeguards against wrongful deletions 
Q8. What safeguards have been put in place to prevent wrongful deletion from the 
electoral roll? 
Ans. To prevent wrongful deletion from the electoral roll, the following safeguards are in 
place: 
 Verification of Death: Deletions due to registered death are made only after proper 
verification, including the submission of a death certificate.  
 Deletion Due to Death (Unregistered) : Deletions based on unregistered deaths 
and shifting are made only after receiving Form -7. 
 Field Verification : Field verification report o f BLO is necessary for each case of 
deletion. During field verification, BLO provide specific remarks about the status of 
shifting or death cases.  
 Shifting: For deletions due to shifting, Form-8 must be submitted by the concerned 
elector. The Electoral Registration Officer (ERO) will confirm the elector's previous 
enrolment and identity before allowing additions at a new address.  
 Notice Requirement: In all cases of proposed deletions (except confirmed deaths), 
a notice must be issued to the elector concerne d and served, giving them a 
reasonable opportunity for a hearing.  
 Cross Verification : For deletions in areas where more than 2% of electors are 
removed or where the same person objects to more than 5 cases, the Electoral 
Registration Officer personally ver ifies the deletions to ensure accuracy.  
The Commission vide its instruction dated 11th August, 2023 (available at ECI’s 
website at https://www.eci.gov.in/eci-
backend/public/api/download?url=LMAhAK 6sOPBp%2FNFF0iRfXbEB1EVSLT41NN
LRjYNJJP1KivrUxbfqkDatmHy12e%2FzVx8fLfn2ReU7TfrqYobgIm%2Fl16v78mrAsX
TdPDHbqajUSsZ8HObhS0eViu3JVylrBOWZzSe4%2FHnPRnMolLpSlRp4RK1XyGKGlE
KV637YC%2F%2BP7KKUGUVj2fcJdUp%2Fc4%2FM1mwlQbS%2FZYZaioux%2BxBo
ww%3D%3D) 
 laid down detailed procedure to be followed in case of dead electors/multiple 
entries/Demographic similar entries/Shifting . 
Q9. Whether name of an elector can be deleted without any enquiry and field 
verification?  
Ans. No. No entry from the electoral rol l can be deleted without following the due 
procedure. To prevent wrongful deletion from the electoral roll, the following 
safeguards are in place: 
 Verification of Death: Deletions due to registered death are only made after proper 
verification, including the submission of a death certificate.  
 Deletion Due to Death (Unregistered) : Deletions based on unregistered deaths 
  
 
Page 7 of 24 
 
and shifting are made only after receiving Form -7. 
 Field Verification : Field verification report of BLO is necessary for each case of 
deletion. During field verification, BLO provide specific remarks about the status of 
shifting or death cases.  
 Shifting: For deletions due to shifting, Form-8 must be submitted by the concerned 
elector. The Electoral Registration Officer (ERO) will confirm the el ector's previous 
enrolment and identity before allowing additions at a new address.  
 Notice Requirement: In all cases of proposed deletions (except confirmed deaths), 
a notice must be issued to the elector concerned and served, giving them a 
reasonable opportunity for a hearing.  
 Cross Verification : For deletions in areas where more than 2% of electors are 
removed or where the same person objects to more than 5 cases, the Electoral 
Registration Officer personally verifies the deletions to ensure accuracy.  
Q10. Are the list of claims and objections prepared and displayed?  
Ans.  Yes. 
i. As per Rule 16 of the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960, during Revision period, ERO 
prepares lists of claims and objections in form 9, 10, 11 and 11A and 11B and exhibits 
on a notice board in his/her office.  
ii. Besides, these lists are also put up on the website of CEO with adequate publicity so that 
citizens are able to lodge objections with the concerned ERO. This is also informed to 
the political parties by holding regular peri odic meetings with them at the level of CEO, 
DEO & ERO and sending written communications to them.  
iii. List of claims and objections is made available by ERO to all political parties on weekly 
basis. For this purpose, the ERO calls a meeting of all political parties on regular interval 
and personally handover list of claims and objections to them and obtain 
acknowledgment. It is to be added that the list is incremental instead of cumulative.  
iv. Decision on claims and objections is taken by ERO only after at least seven clear days’ 
period has passed after furnishing the list of claims and objections to political parties 
and list of claims and objections has been published on all of the following:  
 Website of CEO, as clickable lists for each polling station  
 Notice board of ERO (In Forms 9, 10, 11, 11A and 11B of RERs 1960)  
 Notice board of polling station  location (In Forms 9, 10, 11, 11A and 11B of RERs 1960)  
Measures  taken during Special Summary Revision (SSR)  
Q11. What special measures are taken during Special Summ ary Revision (SSR)?  
Ans. The following measures are taken during SSR: -  
1. The exercise of SSR of electoral roll consists of two stages namely, pre -revision 
activities and revision activities. The Commission issues detailed guidelines while 
ordering the SSR giving ample time to each activity during pre -revision and revision 
period.  
2. Maximum limit of voters in each Polling station is 1500 and these on an average 
comprising of around 200-250 households. A Booth level officer (BLO), knowing the 
area is appointed for the purpose of making field verifications & collection of 
  
 
Page 8 of 24 
 
enrollment forms and actual field information and report back to the Electoral 
Registration Officer (ERO).  
3. Political parties can also appoint their Both Level Agents (BLA).  
4. pre-revision activities mainly consist of training of officials, intensive House -to-
House verification by BLOs for identification of un -enrolled eligible electors, 
identification of discrepancies, removal of multiple/shifted/dead electors, 
standardization of addresses, rationalization and modification of polling stations, 
and integration of supplements for preparation of draft electoral roll.  
5. The actual revision of electoral rolls starts only with the publication of draft electoral 
rolls. A well established and detailed procedure is followed at each stage  of revision.  
6. With the publication of draft electoral roll, the ERO invites applications (claims and 
Objections) from all eligible citizens and after processing of such claims and 
objections, with du e procedure, inclusion/deletions/correction of entries is carried 
out by him. Discrepancies already identified by BLOs during the pre -revision 
activities are also taken -up for removal during this period. All the inclusions, 
deletions and correction carried  out during this period are updated in the electoral 
roll database. After following the due procedure, Electoral roll is finally published, on 
the date as per approved schedule.  
7. During Revision period, the electoral authorities take the following steps  –  
7.1 Preparation and display of list of claims and objections:  
i.   As per Rule 16 of the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960, ERO prepares lists of 
claims and objections in form 9, 10, 11 and 11A and 11B and exhibits one copy of 
such lists on the noti ce board in his office. These lists are also put up on the website 
of CEO with adequate publicity so that citizens are able to see the list and lodge 
objections with the concerned ERO. This is also informed to the political parties by 
holding regular perio dic meetings with them at the level of CEO, DEO & ERO and 
written communications to them.  
ii. Lists of claims and objections are made available by ERO to all political parties on 
weekly basis. For this purpose, the ERO calls a meeting of all political part ies on 
regular interval and personally handover list of claims and objections to them and 
obtain acknowledgment. It is to be added that the list is incremental instead of 
cumulative. 
7.2 Decisions on Claims and Objections: - Decision on claims and objectio ns is taken by 
ERO only after all of the following conditions are complied with – 
i. At least seven clear days’ period has passed after list of claims and objections has 
been published on all of the following – 
 Website of CEO, as clickable lists for each p olling station 
 Notice board of ERO (In Forms 9, 10, 11, 11A and 11B of RERs 1960)  
 Notice board of polling station (In Forms 9, 10, 11, 11A and 11B of RERs 1960)  
 At least period of seven clear days has passed after furnishing the list of claims and 
objections to political parties.  
  
 
Page 9 of 24 
 
 A personal notice has been served on the person whose name is proposed to be 
deleted in cases other than death cases.  
7.3  Supervision and Checks by Supervisor/AEROs/EROs: - 
(i) As per the practice, the ERO, after digitization of received claims & objections, 
deputes BLO concerned to make field verification in connection with the claim or 
objection. The BLO after on-spot verification submits his report to the ERO.   
(ii) There is a well -defined mechanism for supervision and check for enforcing strict 
accountability of the work performed by the BLO. The Supervisor who normally has 
10 BLOs under his charge verifies 5% of each of the BLO’s verification work under 
him.  
(iii)  Above the Supervisors, each AERO is to verify 1% of the BLO’s verification work, 
randomly selected from different parts under him. AERO also field checks 
households with more than 10 electors; abnormal gender ratio, and the first 20 
polling stations with highest number of additions or deletions, under his charge. 
AERO also separately field check 1% of the additions and deletions, giving focus on 
such part of electoral rolls where proposed addition of electors is 4% over previous 
electoral roll. Both, accepted as well as rejected cases, are checked in those cases.  
(iv)  ERO test checks the quality of disposal of claims & objections. ERO also checks 10% 
of the forms disposed by AEROs. Field verification is carried out if felt necessary. ERO 
holds regular moni toring meetings with AEROs, Supervisors and BLOs and ensure 
that the work is not being done in perfunctory manner. Delinquent officials are taken 
to task and corrective measures taken swiftly because statutorily the accountability 
stops with ERO and the ER O is responsible for delivering an error free roll, under 
overall supervision of the Commission.   
7.4  Super-checking by DEO/ Roll Observer/CEO: - 
i. After passing the orders by AERO/ERO, super-checking of verified entries is done by 
the DEO, Roll Observes and CEO for specific number of entries as randomly selected 
by ERO -Net. The number of entries to be verified by DEO, Roll Observes and CEO 
within and up to 7 days after last date of disposal by EROs are as under:  
ii.  At the level of DEO: Verification o f 50 Forms (20 additions+20 deletions+10 
modifications) in the district covering all ACs under his jurisdiction (or) at least 10 
Forms (4 additions+4 deletions+2 modifications) in each of the ACs of the district, by 
table top exercise. Out of these verifie d Forms, field verification must be done in a 
minimum 10 Forms. 
iii. At the level of Roll Observers: Verification of 250 Forms (100 additions+100 
deletions+50 modifications) in the assigned districts or at least 10 Forms (4 
additions+4deletions+2 modificat ions) in each of the assigned districts, by table top 
exercise. Out of these verified Forms, field verification must be done in a minimum 
20 Forms. (Roll Observers are appointed during the revision of Roll from among …..)  
(iv) At the level of CEO: Verifica tion of 250 Forms (100 additions+100 deletions+ 50 
modifications) in the state covering all districts or at least 10 Forms (4 additions+ 4 
deletions+ 2 modifications) in each district, by table top exercise. Out of these 
verified Forms, field verification must be done in a minimum 20 Forms.  
  
 
Page 10 of 24 
 
(v) Critical influx of Forms-6, 7, 8 in an assembly constituency is to be flagged up by the 
District Election Officer concerned to CEO, who in turn review the position on weekly 
basis for course correction, if required.  
 
7.5 The Chart of supervisory check and super checking by the hierarchy of electoral 
authority may be seen below:  
  Monitoring Hierarchy 
   
Roll published 
at each polling 
station in the 
country 
 
Booth Level Officer (BLO)  
   
  BLO Supervisor (5% of each BLO 
work) 
   
  AERO (1% of BLO work)  
   
  ERO (10% AEROs work) 
(Generally at the level of SDM)  
   
Roll is also 
published in 
each district at 
DM/DEOs 
website 
 DEO (Superchecking of 50 forms )  
(At the level of DM/DCs of 
approximately ……district in the 
country)  
   
Commissioner 
level officers of 
the State  
Roll Observer (Superchecking of 250 
forms) ) 
   
  CEO (Superchecking of 250 forms)  
 
 

  
 
Page 11 of 24 
 
Q12. What is the relevant date for revision of electoral roll after the Election Laws  
(Amendment) Act, 2021 came into existence? 
Ans.  The Annual Summary Revision is conducted with reference to 01st January of the  
year as qualifying date, in which the roll is finally published .  During a non- election 
year, no regular revision activities would be there for the subsequent  qualifying 
dates of the year. There would be no restriction on filing of advance application with 
reference to the subsequent qualifying dates of summary revision in a year and such 
advance applications will  be disposed of under  continuous updation. However, 
before each General Elections to the State Legislative Assembly, a second SSR is also 
conducted w.r.t. the qualifying date, proximate to the elections.  
Periodicity of revision of roll, four qualifying dates & advance applications 
Q13. What is the process of updation of roll and periodicity?  
Ans.  The electoral roll is in the state of continuous updation throughout the year except 
during election in a constituency for a period from the last late of filing nomination s 
to completion of election process.  
With the amendment made in Section 14(b) of the Representation of the People Act 
1950, four qualifying dates i.e., 01st January, 01st April, 01st July and 01st October 
have come into effect in a calendar year in place of one qualifying date of 1st January. 
However, the Annual Summary Revision with all pre-revision activities is conducted 
with reference to 01st January of the year only, in which the roll is finally published, 
as qualifying date. Now, any eligible citizen who has completed or is completing 18 
years of age on any of the four qualifying dates of the year can submit advance 
application in Form -6 for registra tion any time in the year from the date of draft 
publication of electoral roll during SSR. Applications will be processed and 
registration will be done in the relevant quarter in which the applicant attains the 
qualifying age of 18 years. During a non - election year, electoral roll will be simply 
updated with reference to the subsequent qualifying dates of the year  without any 
regular revision activity. There would be no restriction on filing of advance 
application with reference to the subsequent  qualifying dates of summary revision 
in a year and such advance applications will  be disposed of under  continuous 
updation. However, before each General Elections to the State Legislative Assembly, 
a second SSR is also conducted w.r.t. the qualifying date,  proximate to the elections.  
Periodicity of revision of roll , four qualifying dates  & advance 
applications 
However, during a year when general election to State Assembly of House of People 
is due, a second Summary Revision may be conducted w.r.t. the quali fying date 
proximate to the said general election.  There would be  no restriction on filing of 
advance application with reference to the subsequent qualifying dates of summary 
revision in a year and such advance applications will be disposed of under 
continuous updation.  
Q14. What is the relevant date for determining the age of 18 years? Can I get 
  
 
Page 12 of 24 
 
myself registered as a voter on the day when I have completed 18 years of age? 
Ans-  With the amendment made in Section 14(b) of the Representation of the People Act 
1950, four qualifying dates i.e., 01st January, 01st April, 01st July and 01st October  
have come into effect in place of one qualifying date of 1st January. Any eligible citizen 
who has completed or is completing 18 years of age on any of the four qualifying date 
of the year can submit advance application in Form -6 for registration any time in  
the year from the date of draft publication of electoral roll during SSR. Applications  
will be processed and registration will be done in the relevant quarter in which the  
applicant attains the qualifying age of 18 years. 
Q15. When will the ERO process the advance claims received with respect to the 
subsequent qualifying dates of the year? 
Ans.  Advance claims received during Annual Summary Revision and also after final 
publication shall be disposed of by the EROs in the concerned subsequent quarters 
only under continuous updation, in the first month of subsequent quarter.  
 
Supervision and checks 
Q16. Is there any provision of supervision and checks by Supervisor/AEROs/EROs?  
Ans.  Yes. 
i. ERO, after digitization of claims & o bjections received by him, deputes BLO concerned to 
make field verification in connection with the claim or objection. The BLO after on -spot 
verification submits his report to the ERO.   
ii. There is a well -defined mechanism for supervision and check for enfor cing strict 
accountability of the work performed by the BLO. The Supervisor who normally has 10 
BLO under his charge verifies 5% of each of the BLO’s verification work under him.  
iii. Above the Supervisors, each AERO is to verify 1% of the BLO’s verification w ork, 
randomly selected from different parts under him. AERO also field checks households 
with more than 10 electors; abnormal gender ratio, and the first 20 polling stations with 
highest number of additions or deletions, under his charge. AERO also separat ely field 
check 1% of the additions and deletions, giving focus on such part of electoral rolls where 
proposed addition of electors is 4% over previous electoral roll. Both, accepted as well as 
rejected cases, are checked in those cases.  
iv. ERO test checks the quality of disposal of claims & objections by his AERO. He also checks 
10% of the Forms disposed by AERO.  
v. Statutorily accountability rests with ERO who is responsible for delivering an error free 
roll, under overall supervision of the Commission.   
Q17. What are the provisions of Super -checking by DEO/Roll Observer/CEO?  
i. After passing the orders by AERO/ERO, super -checking of verified entries is done by the 
DEO, Roll Observes and CEO for specific number of entries as randomly selected by ERO -
Net. The number of entries to be verified by DEO, Roll Observes and CEO within and  up 
to 7 days after last date of disposal by EROs are as under:  
ii. At the level of DEO: Verification of 50 Forms (20 additions+20 deletions+10 
modifications) in the district covering all ACs under his jurisdiction (or) at least 10 Forms 
(4 additions+4 deleti ons+2 modifications) in each of the ACs of the district, by table top 
exercise. Out of these verified Forms, field verification must be done in a minimum 10 
  
 
Page 13 of 24 
 
Forms. 
iii. At the level of Roll Observers: Verification of 250 Forms (100 additions+100 
deletions+50 mo difications) in the assigned districts or at least 10 Forms (4 
additions+4deletions+2 modifications) in each of the assigned districts, by table top 
exercise. Out of these verified Forms, field verification must be done in a minimum 20 
Forms. 
iv. At the level of CEO: Verification of 250 Forms (100 additions+100 deletions+ 50 
modifications) in the state covering all districts or at least 10 Forms (4 additions+ 4 
deletions+ 2 modifications) in each district, by table top exercise. Out of these verified 
Forms, field verification must be done in a minimum 20 Forms.  
v. Critical influx of Forms -6, 7, 8 in an assembly constituency is to be flagged up by the 
District Election Officer concerned to CEO, who in turn review the position on weekly 
basis for course correction, if required. 
Q18. How does the Electoral Registration Officer maintain records of the disposal of 
registration forms? 
Ans. Throughout the processing stages, including assigning of BLO, field report 
submissions, AERO and ERO remarks, decisions on forms by ERO, and EPIC generation, 
IT enabled electoral system keeps tracks of each action with corresponding 
timestamps and officer details. This creates a comprehensive, transparent audit trail.  
Health measures and inclusivity  
Q19. What are the yardsticks for analyzing the health of the electoral roll?  
Ans.  Health of electoral roll is closely monitored by analyzing the statistical data (electoral 
roll vs. projected population) mainly in respect of Electors/Population ratio, gender 
ratio, age-cohort imbalances etc. to bridge the gap and to maximize the enrolment of all 
sections of society to make the electoral roll all inclusive.  
For this statistical analysis of data is done at the level of CEO/DEO/ERO, focusing the 
following parameters: 
(A)National Average E/P ratio: -  
i. E/P ratio (against the total population)  
ii.  E/P ratio (against the eligible population)  
(B)National Average Gender ratio: -  
i. Gender ratio (against the total population)  
ii. Gender ratio (against the eligible population)  
(C)Age-Cohort  
i. 18-19 (average increase against the total population)  
       (average increase in the registration of electors)  
ii. 20-29(average increase against the total population)  
        (average increase in the registration of electors)  
 
Q20. What measures have been taken to ensure an inclusive electoral roll?  
Ans.  The Election Commission of India (ECI) makes significant efforts to ensure that all eligible 
citizens, particularly marginalized groups, are enrolled in the electoral rolls. Special focus is 
placed on grou ps with lower enrolment rates, such as females, persons with disabilities 
(PwD), third genders, and particularly vulnerable tribal groups (PVTGs).  
  
 
Page 14 of 24 
 
To address the low enrolment of young electors, particularly those aged 18 -19, the 
Commission has appointed d edicated Assistant Electoral Registration Officers (AEROs) in 
each assembly constituency to focus on young electors in educational institutions.  
Additional initiatives include:  
 Collaboration with Educational Institutions:  Partnerships with educational boards, 
universities, and professional institutions to encourage enrolment.  
 Curriculum Integration:  Including chapters on democracy and elections in educational 
curricula. 
 Form-6 Accessibility: Providing links to Form -6 in admission and examination forms, and 
through employment exchanges.  
 Electoral Literacy Clubs (ELCs): Activation of ELCs with activities, certificates, and awards 
for performance. 
 Special Outreach Programs: Utilizing ASHA workers and Anganwadi workers to reach out 
to marginalized female citizens, including those of marriageable age and newly married.  
 Targeted Outreach:  Engagement with organizations like old age homes, institutions for 
persons with disabilities, tribal hostels, and NGOs supporting marginalized g roups. 
The Commission also organizes voter awareness events and holds periodic meetings with 
political parties at various levels to ensure broad -based voter participation.  
Facility/Citizen Centric Services 
Q21. What facility/citizen centric services are available to an applicant/citizen during 
preparation of electoral roll?  
Ans. The Election Commission of India (ECI) has introduced several measures to make the 
electoral roll process more convenient and accessible to citizens. Online e-services 
currently offered through Voter Service Portal (VSP) are listed below -: 
(i) Search your name in electoral roll: Elector can search his name and particulars in 
electoral roll, polling station details, Parliamentary Constituency wise or District wise 
by providing his name and relatives name or EPIC No.  
(ii) Know your BLO, ERO and DEO: User can get particulars of Booth Level 
Officer/Electoral Registration Officer/ /District Election Officer by entering the EPIC 
number. 
(iii) Access to e-roll in pdf format: User are directed to respective website of Chief   Electoral 
Officer and can get access and view/download electoral rolls in pdf format.  
(iv) Apply online forms for the following services:  
 New Voter Registration (Form6)  
 Inclusion of names for overseas electors (Form6A) 
 Letter of Information of Aadhaar number for the purpose of electoral roll authentication 
(Form 6B)  
 Objection for Proposed Inclusion/ Deletion of Name in Existing Electoral Roll (Form 7)  
 Shifting of Residence/Correction of Entries in Existing Elec toral Roll/ Replacement of 
EPIC/Marking of PwD (Form 8) In all the above services, electors are provided facility to 
upload scanned copies of documents and photograph.  
  
 
Page 15 of 24 
 
(v) Track status of application: An applicant can track his application already submitte d 
online or know status by providing reference ID provided to him at the time of online 
registration.  
(vi)Dashboard for Citizen: Dashboard facility has been provided to all the registered electors 
to check the status of all his applied forms.  
(vii) E-EPIC Download: User can download electronic copy of EPIC Card (E -EPIC) by 
providing EPIC no or reference no of the form  
 
Q22. Where the postal address of the Electoral Registration Officers can be obtained 
from? 
Ans.-       Postal addresses of all Electoral Registration Officers are available on the website  of 
Election Commission of India / Chief Electoral Officers of respective State / Union 
Territory (link to which has been provided on the Election Commission of India  
website). 
Q23.  If I apply on line, whether I need to send physical signed copy of the form with  
documents to the Electoral Registration Officer’s address? 
Ans.-  As soon as the ERO/AERO receives Form 6 filed on line, the same would be downloaded 
and BLO would be deputed to visit your residence for verification. 
Q24.        Where can the list of claims and objections be seen? 
Ans.  It can be seen on the website of the Chief Electoral Officer of the State concerned. It can 
also be seen on the notice board at the office of the Electoral Registration Officer. 
Q25.        How will an applicant know that his/her name is included in the electoral roll? 
Ans.  The decision of the Electoral Registration Officer will be communicated to the applicant 
by post on his address given by him in Form 6 and also by SMS on the  mobile number 
given by him in Form 6. Electoral rolls are also available on the  website of the Chief 
Electoral Officer of the State concerned and can be seen by  anybody. 
Q26.    How can corrections be made if there are some mistakes in the entries in the 
electoral roll pertaining to electors? 
Ans. For correction of mistakes in electoral rolls, an application in Form 8 is to be 
submitted to the Electoral Registration Officer concerned. 
Q27. I have shifted from my residence where I am registered an elector to some other 
place. How do I ensure that I am enrolled in my new place of residence? 
Ans. In case of shifting, please fill form 8 and submit to the ERO of the constituency 
(online/offline) where your new residence is located. 
Q28.    I have shifted my residence recently. I have Electors Photo Identity Card (EPIC) 
with the old address. Can I get new EPIC for the present address? 
Ans.  First of all, you have to ensure that you are enrolled in the electoral roll of the concerned 
Assembly Constituency in which your new address is located. The Electoral 
Registration Officer will issue a new EPIC, with the same number, of the shifted address. 
  
 
Page 16 of 24 
 
Q29.        My EPIC has some errors. What is the procedure to have a new EPIC with correct 
particulars? 
Ans.       You can make an application in Form 8 for rectification of the errors in your EPIC.  The 
Electoral Registration Officer will issue a new EPIC, with the same number, after making 
the necessary corrections. 
Q30.        I have lost my old EPIC. How can I get a new EPIC? 
Ans.  A replacement EPIC can be issued to an elector on the receipt of Form-8 for the purpose, 
along with a copy of FIR/Police Report. 
Q31.        Who can object to the inclusion of names in electoral rolls? 
Ans.       Any person who is a voter in the concerned constituency may object to the inclusion  of 
names in electoral roll on the ground that the person whose names is included  or is 
proposed to be included is not eligible to be registered as a voter in that  constituency. 
An objection can be made in Form 7 to the concerned ERO along with the relevant proof. 
Q32. My neighbour / relative has shifted his residence to a new place but his name still 
continues in the electoral roll. In which Form the application for deletion of his 
name from the electoral roll can be made? 
  Ans.-  For deletion of name of a shifted/dead/absentee elector, application can be made in Form 
7. For deletion of a duplicate entry also, application should be made in Form 7. 
  Q33. When can one get registered in electoral roll. Does enrollment continue 
throughout the year. 
Ans. The Election Commission normally orders revision of existing electoral roll every   year 
sometime in the months of September to October and such revised rolls are finally 
published in first week of January of the coming year. One can submit claim application 
(Form 6) during period for lodging claims and objections to Electoral  Registration 
Officer or an officer designated to receive such applications, i.e., Designated Officer. 
Even after final publication, the rolls are updated continuously  and one can get 
registered anytime during the continuous updation by filing a claim application to 
ERO/AERO. 
Q34.    If I have a complaint against the order of Electoral Registration Officer, to whom 
I should make an appeal? 
Ans.         During the period of revision, you can file an appeal to the District Election Officer.  In 
the case of the period of continuous updation, such appeal against any order of  ERO 
will lie before the District Magistrate/Additional  DM/Executive Magistrate/  District 
Collector of the District concerned. A further appeal against the order of  Appellate 
Authority will lie before the Chief Electoral Officer of the State. 
 
Condition of registration process  
Q35.  What are the main categories of electors in India?  
Ans-  There are 3 categories of electors in India: – 
(i) General electors 
  
 
Page 17 of 24 
 
(ii) Oversees (NRI) electors , and 
(iii) Service Electors . 
Q36.  What is the condition for getting registered in electoral roll? 
Ans-   Applicant should be 
i. An Indian citizen, 
ii. of 18 years or more of age with reference to qualifying dates, 
iii. ordinary resident of the area concerned 
Q37. Can a non-citizen of India become a voter in the electoral rolls in India? 
Ans.-    No. A person who  is not a  citizen of India  is not eligible  for registration as  a voter in the 
electoral rolls in India. Even those who have ceased to be citizens of India on  acquiring the 
citizenship of another country are not eligible to be enrolled in the electoral rolls in India. 
Q38. Can a non-resident Indian settled in foreign land become an elector of electoral roll in 
India? 
Ans.  Yes. According to the provisions of Sec 20A of the Representation of the People Act,  1950 
by the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2010, a person who is  a citizen of 
India and who has not acquired the citizenship of any other country and     is otherwise 
eligible to be registered as a voter and who is absenting from his place  of ordinary residence 
in India owing to his employment, education or otherwise is  eligible to be registered as a 
voter in the constituency in which his place of residence in India as mentioned in his  
passport is located. 
Q39. How can one get registered/enrolled in the electoral roll? 
Ans.    One  has to file the application for the purpose, in prescribed Form 6(6A in case        of 
overseas Indian), before the Electoral Registration Officer (ERO)/Assistant Electoral 
Registration Officer (AERO) of the constituency within which the place of ordinary 
residence of the applicant falls. The application accompanied by copies      of the relevant 
documents can be filed in person before the concerned ERO/AERO  or sent by post or can 
be handed over to the Booth Level Officer of polling area concerned, or can be filed online 
through NVSP portal/VHA mobile application or  on website of Chief Electoral Officer of 
the concerned state/ECI. While filing Form 6  on line, the copies of necessary documents 
should also be uploaded. 
Q40. From where registration forms can be obtained? 
Ans.  Forms can be downloaded from the website of Election Commission of India. Forms 
are also available free of cost in offices of Electoral Registration Officers/Assistant 
Electoral Registration Officers and Booth Level Officers of the concerned  polling station 
areas. 
Q41.        What documents are required to be enclosed with Form 6? 
Ans.  One recent passport size coloured photograph, duly affixed in the box given for the  
purpose in Form 6 and photo -copies of documentary proof of age and residence  are 
required to be enclosed with Form 6. The list of documentary proof of DoB and  
residence which can be enclosed with Form 6 is given in the form itself and guidelines 
  
 
Page 18 of 24 
 
appended thereto. For filling up Form 6, the said guidelines may be referred to. 
Q42.   Is it mandatory to provide the Aadhaar details of the applicant in the field 
provided in the Forms for registration? 
Ans.         No it is a purely voluntary field and non -submission of Aadhaar details shall not be  a 
ground for the rejection of the application by the Electoral Registration Officer. It  is 
expected from the applicant to furnish the Aadhaar details voluntarily for the sake of 
purification of electoral roll. 
Q43.     I am a student staying at the place of study in a hostel / mess far from my native  
place. I want to get myself registered at my present address of residence. What  
should I do? 
Ans.-    In case of a student residing at the place of study, in hostel or mess managed by the 
educational institutions or elsewhere will have the option to get himself /  herself 
registered as elector at his / her native place with his / her parents or at the address of 
hostel / mess where he / she is resident for the time being for pursuing his / her studies. 
The course pursued by the said students should be recognized by  Central / State 
Governments / Boards / Universities / Deemed Universities and  such courses should 
be of not less than 1 year’s duration. Such student who wants to        enroll himself / herself 
at the hostel / mess will have to attach a bonafide certificate (as per the specimen at 
Annexure II of Guidelines attached to Form 6 available on  the website of Election 
Commission) from the Headmaster / Principal / Director /  Registrar / Dean of his/her 
educational institution with Form 6 
Q44.     A homeless person, who is otherwise eligible for registration as an elector, 
does not possess documentary proof of ordinary residence. What is the 
procedure of verification in such case? 
Ans.    In case of homeless persons, the Booth Level Officer will visit the address given in Form 
6 at night to ascertain that the homeless person actually  sleeps at the place  which is 
given as his address in Form 6. If the Booth Level Officer is able to verify that the homeless 
person actually sleeps at that place, no documentary proof of place     of residence shall 
be necessary. Booth Level Officer must visit for more than one  night for such 
verification. After conducting such verification and to the satisfaction of ERO that the 
person fulfills all the prescribed conditions, necessary action for  enrolment shall be  
done. 
Q 45.  I am a tenant and  how can I get enrolled as a voter? Who is competent authority 
to verify claim applications and  objections?  
Ans.-      To get enrolled in the voter list is your statutory right. please fill up From 6 and submit 
(online/offline) it to  the ERO/ AERO/ Booth Level Officer of your area along with the 
requisite document mentioned in the guidelines to fill the Form -6. 
Q46.        Can one be enrolled at more than one place? 
Ans.  No. A person cannot be enrolled as a voter at more than one place in view of the  
provisions contained in Sections 17 and 18 of Representation of the People Act,  1950. 
Likewise, no person can be enrolled as an elector more than once in any  electoral roll. 
  
 
Page 19 of 24 
 
Any person while applying for fresh enrolment, makes a statement or declaration that 
his/her name is not included in the electoral roll of any other  constituency, and if such 
statement/declaration is false and which the applicant  either knows or believes to be 
false or does not believe to be true, he is liable to be  punished under section 31 of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950. 
 
 
Overseas (NRI) Electors 
Q47. Who is an overseas (NRI) elector? Can an NRI settled in foreign land become 
an elector of electoral roll in India? 
Ans.-  An overseas elector is a person who is a citizen of India and who has not acquired  
citizenship of any other country and is otherwise eligible  to be registered as a  voter 
and who  is absenting from his place of ordinary residence in India owing to  his 
employment, education or otherwise is eligible to be registered as a voter in  the 
constituency in which his place of residence in India as mentioned in his passport is 
located. According to the provisions of Section 20A of the Representation of the  People 
Act, 1950, an NRI settled in foreign land can become an elector in electoral roll in India. 
Q48.     How can an overseas Indian (NRI) get registered / enrolled in the electoral roll? 
Ans.-    He/she has to file an application for the purpose in prescribed Form 6A before  the 
Electoral Registration Officer/Assistant Electoral Registration Officer of the  
constituency within which the place of ordinary residence of the applicant in India  as 
given in his/her passport falls. The application accompanied by duly self-attested copy 
of the relevant documents can be filed in person before the concerned ERO/  AERO or 
sent by post addressed to him or can be filed online through NVSP portal/  VHA mobile 
app or on the website of Chief Electoral Officer of the concerned stat/  ECI. 
Q49. What documents are required to be enclosed with Form 6A? 
Ans.- One recent passport size coloured photograph, duly affixed in Form 6A, photo- copies 
of the relevant pages of the passport containing photograph, his address in India and 
all other particulars of the applicant and also the page of passport containing   the valid 
visa endorsement. 
Q50. Where the entries pertaining to overseas (NRI) elector find place in the electoral 
roll? 
Ans.-  Name of overseas elector is included in a separate section for “Overseas Electors” which 
is the last section of the roll of that particular part / polling station area of the 
constituency in which his place of residence in India as mentioned in his passport is 
located. 
Q51.  Whether Electoral Registration Officer is to be informed of the change in current  
residential address of the overseas (NRI) electors in the country of his/her 
residence? 
Ans.-  Yes. It is the responsibility of the overseas elector to keep the Electoral Registration  
Officer informed of the change in residential address in the country of his/her  
  
 
Page 20 of 24 
 
residence. 
Q52.  Whether Electoral Registration Officer is to be informed when the overseas (NRI) 
elector returns to India and becomes ordinarily resident in India? 
Ans.-       Yes. An overseas elector must do so. In such a case, the person can then be registered 
as a general elector at the place where he is ordinarily resident in India. 
Q53.    How can an overseas (NRI) elector whose name is enrolled in the electoral roll  
exercise his/her franchise?  
Ans.-  After enrolment, an overseas (NRI) elector becomes able to cast his/her vote in an  
election in the Constituency, in person, at the polling station provided for the part  
where he/she is registered as an overseas (NRI) elector. 
Q54.         Is an overseas (NRI) elector issued an EPIC? 
Ans. –      An overseas (NRI) elector is not issued an EPIC as he is allowed to cast his vote in  an 
election in the constituency, in person at the polling station on production of his   
original passport. 
Q55.  Whether the overseas (NRI) elector should surrender EPIC, if already  issued to 
him, in India? 
Ans. Yes. The overseas elector should surrender EPIC, if already issued to him, in India, 
along with submission of Form 6 A. 
 Last Part of Electoral Roll for Service Voters  
 Q56. Who is a service voter? 
Ans.  Service voter is a voter having service qualification. According to the provisions of  sub-
section (8) of Section 20 of Representation of the People Act, 1950, service qualification 
means – 
(a) Being a member of the armed Forces of the Union; or 
(b) Being a member of a force to which provisions of the Army Act, 1950 (46 of  
1950), have been made applicable whether with or without modification; 
(c) Being a member of an Armed Police Force of a State, and serving outside that 
state; or 
(d) Being a person who is employed under the Government of India, in a post 
outside India. 
Q57. What are the application Forms in which various categories of service voters 
have to apply for enrollment as elector? 
Ans. Following are the application Forms in which various categories of service voters are 
to make application for enrollment as service voter: - 
1. Members of Armed Forces – Form 2 
2. Members of Armed Police Force of a State, serving outside that State – Form 2 A 
3. Persons employed under Government of India on post outside India – Form 3 
  
 
Page 21 of 24 
 
However, if a service personnel has opted to get himself enrolled as general elector at 
place of his posting, where he is actually residing, he will have to apply in Form 6 like 
other general electors. 
Q58. What is the process of enrollment of any service personnel as a service voter? 
Ans.  Election Commission normally orders  revision/updation of rolls for service voters  
every year. The Commission sends a communication to Ministry of Defence, Ministry of 
Home Affairs and Ministry of External Affairs intimating them of the commencement of 
revision programme. As soon as the programme is announced,  persons having service 
qualification can fill up the application in statutory Form 2 / 2A / 3, and handover to the 
officer in-charge of record office or the nodal authority in          Ministry of External Affairs (in 
case of persons employed under Government of India on a post outside India). All the 
activities of summary revision including submission of Forms by eligible service 
personnel through their Record Officer/Commanding  Officer are done online through 
service voters portal exclusively meant for service  personnel. The person applying in 
Form 2 / 2A has also to submit a declaration to the effect that he did not get enrolled as 
general elector in any constituency which  is the part of the Form itself.  The officer in-
charge, after verification of the Form  forwards the same to the Electoral Registration 
Officer concerned to process the  Form and to take necessary action for enrolment. 
  Q59.  Is spouse (wife or husband) or son/daughter of a service voter also enrolled as 
a service voter? 
Ans.     The spouse of a service voter shall, if he/she is ordinarily residing with his/her spouse, 
can also be registered as service voter in the constituency specified by  that person. 
The service voter has to make a statement to the effect in the relevant  Form 2/2A/3 
that his/her wife/husband ordinarily resides with him/her. The wife/ husband will be 
enrolled as a service voter on the basis of declaration made by her husband/his wife 
in the application form itself submitted by him/her and no  separate declaration / 
application is required to be made by the wife/husband. A  
son/daughter/relative/servant etc. residing ordinarily with a ser vice voter cannot  be 
enrolled as service voter. 
Q60.        Can one be enrolled simultaneously as a service voter at his native place as well as 
a general voter at the place of posting? 
Ans.      No. A person, at a particular time, cannot be enrolled as a voter at more than one  place 
in view of the provisions contained under Sections 17 and 18 of Representation of People 
Act, 1950. Likewise, no person can be enrolled as an elector more than once in any 
electoral roll. As explained above, a service voter has  option either to  get himself 
registered as service voter at his native place or as general elector at the place of posting. 
When a person applies for registration as a service voter in Form 2 
/ 2A, he has to submit a declaration in a prescribed format to the effect that he did 
not get enrolled as ordinary general elector in any constituency. 
Q61. Who is a Classified Service Voter? 
Ans.  Service voter belonging to Armed Forces or forces to which provisions of Army Act,  
1950 are applicable, has option of either voting through postal ballot or through a  
  
 
Page 22 of 24 
 
proxy voter duly appointed by him. A service voter who opts for voting through a proxy 
is called Classified Service Voter (CSV). 
  Q62. Who is a ‘proxy’? What is the procedure of appointment of a ‘proxy’? 
Ans.   A service voter may appoint (by applying to Returning Officer in Form 13 F of Conduct  of 
Elections Rules, 1961 – Form available at the website of Election Commission) any                person 
as his / her proxy to give vote on his / her behalf and in his / her name at the  polling 
station. The proxy shall have to be ordinary resident of that constituency. He   need not 
be a registered voter but he / she must not be disqualified to be registered as a voter. A 
‘proxy’ can be appointed in the following two ways: - 
•  If a service voter is at the place of his posting, he has to put his signature in 
Form 13F before the Commanding Officer of the Unit and then to send the Form 
to his proxy for affixing his / her signature before a Notary / First  Class 
Magistrate. Thereafter, the proxy can submit the Form to the Returning Officer 
concerned. 
•  If a service voter is at his native place, both he and his proxy can sign Form  13 
F before a Notary / First Class Magistrate and then send to the Returning Officer 
concerned. 
  Q63. Can a Classified Service Voter be issued postal ballots by the Returning Officer? 
Ans.      A Classified Service Voter cannot be issued postal ballots but the appointed proxy  shall 
physically come and vote at the polling station which covers the classified voter’s home 
address. 
Q64.         For what period a proxy remains valid? 
Ans.   The provision for voting through proxy is valid till the person making the appointment is a 
service voter. Once appointed, the proxy will continue until his appointment is 
revoked by the service voter. The facility of proxy voter can be revoked and the  proxy 
can be changed at any time or for any number of times by the Classified  Service Voter. 
Thus a Classified Service Voter can revoke and opt back f or postal ballot route or even 
substitute the proxy by intimating the Returning Officer in Form 13 G of Conduct of 
Elections Rules, 1961 (Form available at the website of Election  Commission). 
Revocation will become effective from the date it is received by the Returning Officer. 
Q65. When should the application for appointment of a proxy be made? 
Ans.- Application for appointment of a proxy should be received by the Returning Officer  
before the last date of filing of nomination papers. An application for appointment of a 
proxy received after the last date of filing nomination papers cannot be considered for 
the election in progress, though it will be valid for subsequent elections unless 
revoked / changed 
Q66. In which language the last part of rolls is prepared for service voters? 
Ans. The last part containing the list of service voter is prepared in English only. 
Q67.  Is a service voter issued Elector Photo Identity Card (EPIC) like ordinary 
electors? 
  
 
Page 23 of 24 
 
Ans.  A service voter is not issued Elector Photo Identity Card (EPIC). Elector Photo Identity  
Card (EPIC) is a document of identity which an elector has to show at the polling station 
at the time of casting his vote. As service voters are issued postal ballots or  votes 
through his ‘proxy’, they are not required to visit the polling stations personally and 
therefore Elector Photo Identity Cards (EPICs) is not issued to them. 
Q68. Is a service voter required to apply for issue of a postal ballot paper? 
Ans.  No, the Returning Officer will himself send a postal ballot paper to him through his  
record office (or direct or through the Ministry of External Affairs in the case of a  
service voter serving outside India).  
 
Electoral Roll for Legislative Council Constituencies 
Q69. What is the relevant date for revision of electoral rolls for Legislative Council 
Constituencies? 
Ans.-     In the case of Local Authorities Constituencies there is no qualifying date, however  the 
qualifying date for being enrolled in Graduates and Teachers Constituencies 1st day of 
November of the year in which the preparation or revision of the electoral  rolls is 
commenced. 
Q70.  How can one get registered/enrolled in the electoral rolls for Legislative Council 
Constituencies? 
Ans.-      For enrolment in electoral roll for Local Authorities Constituencies only ex -officio and 
nominated members of the Local Authorities in the concerned State are eligible. The 
application for inclusion can be made in Form 17 to the Electoral Registration  Officer. 
For registration in Graduates and Teachers Constituencies, one has to file the application 
for the purpose, in prescribed Form 18 or 19 as the case may be, before the ERO/AERO 
of the constituency within which the place of ordinary residence of  the applicant falls. 
The application accompanied by copies of the relevant documents can be filed in person 
before the concerned ERO/AERO or sent by post addressed to him. 
Q71.        From where Form 17/18/19 can be obtained? 
Ans.  It can be downloaded from the website of Election Commission of India. Forms are also 
available free of cost in offices of Electoral Registration Officers / Assistant  Electoral 
Registration Officers. 
Q72.       What are the conditions for enrolment in Graduates and Teachers Constituencies?  
Ans.      For enrolment in a Graduates’ Constituency one should be an ordinarily resident in 
that Constituency, and should have, for at least three years before the qualifying  date 
(1st November of the year), been either a Graduate of a university in India or in 
possession of any of the qualification deemed to be equivalent to that of a Graduate of a 
university in India. For registration in electoral roll for a Teachers’Constituency, one 
should be ordinarily resident in that Constituency and within the six years immediately 
before the qualifying date (1st November of the year), for a total period of at least three 
years, should have been engaged in teaching in any of the educational institutions 
notified by the State Government within the State, not lower than in 
  
 
Page 24 of 24 
 
standard than that of a secondary school. 
Q73. What documents are required to be enclosed with Form 18? 
Ans.-  The eligible person should apply for enrolment of their names in the prescribed Form - 
18 along with any of the documents listed below- 
(i) The degree/diploma certificate, in original, issued by the University or Institution 
concerned or a copy thereof, duly authenticated by the Designated Officer/  
Additional Designated Officer/Gazetted Officer of the District concerned. 
(ii) A copy of an entry in the Government record or a certificate issued to a Graduate 
employee by the Gazetted Head of Offices/Institutes on the basis of entries  in 
Government records in his custody or a copy of an entry in the record of  
Statutory Bodies, Corporations or Public undertakings specifying the degree, 
diploma or certificate possessed by the claimant, duly at tested by the Head  of 
the office concerned; or 
(iii) An attested copy of the card of registration as Registered Graduate issued by  the 
University, a certified copy of the relevant entry in the list of Registered  
Graduates’, the Roll of Advocates, the Register of Medical Practitioners, the  
Register of Chartered Accountants, the Register of Engineers maintained by 
Institute of Engineers, etc.; or 
(iv) An Affidavit by the claimant, supported by certificate from the Registrar of a  
University, or the Principal of a College affiliated to university or from the  Head 
of the Department of such College under whom he had studied; or 
(v) The mark sheet, in original, issued by the University or Institution concerned  or a 
copy there of, duly authenticated by the Additional Designated Officer/ Gazetted 
Officer of the District concerned/Notary Public. 
Q74.        What documents are required to be enclosed with Form 19? 
Ans.-  Every person applying for enrolment (in Form-19) in Teachers’ constituency must 
submit documentary  proof of having been engaged in teaching in any of the specified 
educational institutions for a total period of at least three years within six years 
immediately before the qualifying date. Electoral Registration Officer /  Assistant 
Electoral Registration Officer concerned should make such verification of  the 
documentary proof as he considers necessary. A certificate by the Head of the  teaching 
institution should normally be considered adequate documentary proof of possessing 
that teaching qualification. If any person, who has applied for inclusion  of his name in 
a teachers’ constituency, has been engaged in teaching in more than  on specified 
educational institutions in the last six years, the certificate from the  Head of institution 
of each of such educational institution will be required for the  period for which he was 
engaged in teaching in that educational institution. 
 
 
******************* 